---
title: 'Understanding TLS (Transport Layer Security)'
date: 2023-03-23 07:00:00
author: 'Sabir Hassan'
image: '../images/tls-ssl-handshake.png'
image_alt: 'javascript'
tags:
  - tls
  - web security
  - encryption
  - client-server
  - communication
---

## What is TLS?

TLS (Transport Layer Security) is a cryptographic protocol that provides security for the connection between a web server and web application by utilizing data encryption. This protocol applies to all network-based data transfer, including browsing sessions, file transfers, and emails. The use of TLS ensures that sensitive user data, such as login credentials and credit card information, is protected from unauthorized access by hackers.

Transport Layer Security (TLS) plays a vital role in safeguarding your website by shielding user information from security risks such as malware and denial-of-service (DoS) attacks.

TLS guarantees that only authorized individuals can access encrypted data, thus providing enhanced security. For instance, by utilizing TLS encryption for an online shop, you can secure your customers' transactions by transforming their sensitive information into a confidential code, making it impossible for outsiders to access the data.

## How does TLS work?

TLS establishes a secure connection between the client and server applications by employing encryption. When a user accesses a secured website, they specify the TLS encryption method, such as the advanced encryption standard (AES), to be used.

TLS operates using two security layers: the TLS record protocol and the TLS handshake protocol. These protocols use symmetric and asymmetric cryptography methods to secure data transfer and communications between clients and web servers.

The TLS handshake protocol utilizes asymmetric cryptography to create public and private keys for data encryption and decryption. The overall process is as follows:

1. The client sends a list of TLS versions and cipher suite suggestions, as well as a random number for later use.
2. The server selects the options to use and sends a TLS certificate for authentication.
3. After validating the certificate, the client creates and sends a pre-master key encrypted with the server's public key.
4. The client and server use the pre-master key and the previously generated random numbers to generate session keys.
5. Both the client and server have a finished message that has been encrypted with a session key.
6. The TLS handshake process is finished, and both the client and server have created secure symmetric encryption.

Once the TLS handshake is complete, the client and server can securely exchange data using the agreed-upon encryption algorithm and the shared secret key.

## Difference between SSL and TSL

SSL, or Secure Sockets Layer, is an older version of TLS. SSL 3.0 was the final version before TLS was introduced.

Both SSL and TLS use cryptographic keys in various application layer protocols, including HTTP, FTP, IMAP, and SMTP. However, TLS offers a different handshake process, more robust encryption algorithms, and more secure cipher suites than SSL. This results in better data security and authentication with TLS certificates.

For example, TLS uses a more robust message authentication code (HMAC) while SSL uses a standard MAC. Additionally, TLS can send multiple alert messages to inform both parties about error issues, while SSL can only send one error message.

Despite these differences, the terms SSL and TLS are often used interchangeably since TLS was initially released as an upgrade to SSL 3.0. As a result, the term TLS/SSL is commonly used to refer to the protocol.

When using a website with TLS, a padlock icon should appear next to the URL bar, indicating that the connection is secure. Clicking on the icon allows you to view details about the TLS/SSL certificate, providing additional information on the security of the connection.

## Difference between TLS and HTTPS

It is important to note the difference between HTTP and HTTPS before discussing TLS and HTTPS further. Although both serve the same function, HTTP is used to transfer data between applications while HTTPS is its secure version that uses encryption. This is why most modern browsers now mark HTTP sites as insecure.

To secure data over the network and protect communications between a web server and a browser, HTTPS uses TLS connection as the security layer, which works on top of the Transmission Control Protocol (TCP.) TLS has various versions, ranging from TLS 1.0 to 1.3. Major web browsers recommend using a newer version or at least TLS 1.2 by default for websites. TLS 1.3, the latest version, offers a shorter TLS handshake process and more secure algorithms, resulting in a faster connection and better performance.
